CMPT 14x Orientation - Mac OSRevised Introduction to the Macintosh and MPW(CMPT 145 students can surely skip this.)Part IA Complete this part only if you are unfamiliar with the visually oriented operating system of the Macintosh computer.  1) Experiment using the Macintosh computer until you are familiar with:file	folder	dialog boxpoint	click, double click	selectdrag	open	closepull down menu	cut	copypastePart IB 2) You are now ready to run MPW.• Insert your own ZIP disk into the ZIP drive.• If your disk has been previously used in a Macintosh computer, it will "mount" and appear with its name on the desktop. If it is blank, you will get a dialog box notifying you that your disk cannot be read and asking if you want to have it initialized. Select the type of format you want (Mac OS Standard, Mac OS Extended, or DOS) and name the disk. Note: If you want to transfer files between the MACs and PCs, format the ZIP disk to DOS. For our purposes, the disk name should have no spaces in it. It may not have any periods, slashes, apostrophes, colons, or quotes, either. (Apart from colons, this is an MPW limitation, not a Mac limitation.) If the disk has a name already with any of these in the name, please rename it now. Call it some such name as "DodieDeeDanielsDisk" or something to that effect. To do this from the finder, click on the name of the file under its icon and wait a few seconds for the editing I-beam cursor to appear. Type a new name to replace the old one. NOTE: The Mac will read PC disks, but you might not be able to use your disk with MPW. If not, copy your files to a Mac disk. Alternately, store your files in a directory other than the ROOT directory, and you should be OK. To do this, create a folder on your PC disk using the finder. Call it, say "MPWFiles" or some such thing—no special characters in name.• NOTE: All disks fail eventually. For this reason, you should have another disk to back up your files.• You need not create any other folders on the disk at the present time, but you should leave it in the drive for storing your files.• Now, open the hard disk, if it is not already, by double clicking on its icon at the top right.• Open (run) the application MPW Shell in this folder in the same way (by double clicking on its icon). Or select from the menu Apple:Favourites:MPW Shell. After a while, you will be facing a screen with a file called "Worksheet" now open and having some pull down menus at the top.• Whenever you start MPW, or switch disks, you will have to set the directory to where your files reside. From the Directory menu you must select Set Directory and from the resulting box, click on "desktop", then on the name of your disk (then your folder, if you made one, and you must if using DOS formatted), finally on "select current directory."• In either case, you may wish to confirm that your disk is selected as the default directory by choosing the show command under the Directory menu. It will be here (in the default directory) that the files you create will be stored.3) You are now ready to write your first program using the MPW editor. To do this,• open a new window by choosing New from the File menu. You will get a blank window overlaid on top of the worksheet. For ease of switching between the two, you may wish to select Stack Windows from the Window menu, or change their size using the grow box (bottom right of window) and/or their or position on the screen by dragging them by their title bars.• In the window you have opened, type out your first program.• Be sure that you include all the required elements of a correct Module as outlined in the lecture. Try the "hello world" example in Chapter 2 of the on-line text (or lecture) as your first assignment. Use some imagination in the message.• To correct errors just as they are typed, backspace and retype.• To indent, use the tab key. Subsequent lines will indent the same amount. You can backspace over a tab to reduce the indentation level.• When you think you are done, choose Save As from the File menu. You will see your own directory and can type a file name now. The Modula-2 compiler expects that THE FILE NAME IS THE SAME AS THE NAME OF THE PROGRAM MODULE, PLUS THE EXTENSION ".MOD" so use this name. (e.g. if the program is called "Hello," then the file containing it should be called "Hello.MOD") Note, however, that although Module names and the .MOD extension are case sensitive, file names in general are not. That is, don't have two programs called "ThisProg" and "thisprog." Modula-2 can distinguish these, but the Macintosh OS cannot distinguish between them as filenames.• Should you make later changes to this file, perhaps after re-opening it following a rest of a few days, the changes can be saved with the Save command in the File menu whenever the file to be saved is in the topmost (active) window. This will save to the name on the title bar.• You may wish to list the files on your disk just to make sure. Do this by selecting the List Directory option from the File menu. The list will appear on the active window, so you may wish to have the Worksheet on top when you do this. If you don't want to keep this list, delete it immediately by selecting the "Undo" command from the Edit menu. This may be useful for other things too. Note that if you Undo something and change your mind, the next Undo will put it back. Note also that there is a keyboard equivalent for this and other commands listed on the menu. Once you memorize some of these equivalents, feel free to use them by pressing the "command" button along with the appropriate letter key. (Do this by pressing and holding the command button, then while it is down, pressing the letter key for the command you want executed.)4) You are now ready to compile and link your program. To do this,• Pull down the M2 menu and choose Compile from the top group, that is to act on the active (target) window.• The worksheet window will come to the front to report any errors. Your window is still the target.• If the cursor first changes to the spinning beachball, and when done, reports nothing, all went well and you can go to the next step, and the next menu item. Chances are, however, that there will be error messages, like the following printed on the worksheet.# 6 BEGIN##### ^ 23: ';' expected File "TWTransfer:Hello.MOD"; Line 6Modula2 - Execution terminated!Note that some of the program context is given, along some commentary about what the error is suspected to have been. This one was generated by trying to compile a Module called Hello in which there was a line with a missing semicolon. Deal with errors as follows:- triple click on the line "File ... line ..." and press the "Enter" key (not Return)- your file will re-open with the offending line selected. The error should be on this line, but may be on a previous line. Correct the error with appropriate editing.- bring the worksheet back to the top and triple click on the next error message- repeat until all errors are fixed (you think)- now go back to the worksheet window and delete all the error messages, and try again to compile as before. You may go through this process several times, as each time the compiler will attempt to compile more code before giving up. Correcting errors sometimes introduces new ones, or reveals old ones that the compiler could not pick up the first time.• Once the compile finished successfully (no new error messages) you could list your directory again, just to see the effect. There will be a new file called (using the example above) Hello.MOD.o or Hello.MOD.x where the ".o" or ".x" signifies the "object code" generated by the compiler.• Now, you are ready to select the next item in the M2 menu (called Make Link File) which causes the generation of a Makefile that the linker requires to patch your code together with the preexisting library modules (for things like STextIO). Do it.• This creates yet another file on your disk, called Hello.make. During the course of this, the name Hello.MOD will be printed on the Worksheet.• Now select the third item from the same M2 menu (called Re-Link). This uses the compiled code and the makefile to create the final application. When it is done (it may take a few seconds) the linker will "beep" twice to let you know.• This creates yet another file on your disk, simply called Hello. The others are all text files that could be opened and edited. This one is not; it is a program, and can be executed.• Assuming that all has gone well to this point, you may now execute your application.- Type its name in the worksheet window and press the "Enter" key (not "return"). (But hold on.. if you just did a successful re-link, the name was typed for you, so just press "Enter" -- you do not have to pay for this courtesy; I provided it free.)- MPW switches control to your program and runs it. A text window will open and your application will then run, with the output being typed in a window entitled terminal.- Alternately, you may run your program switch to the Finder and double click on your application Hello for the same effect.5) To save or print the session from your program you can pull down the File menu Save item or the Print item as you like.6) Your program has been linked to a simple application frameword that gives you a proper Macintosh window for its terminal. Just closing this window does not quit the program. You must use the File menu choice Quit or type Cmd-Q in order to quit the program. If you go back to MPW leaving your program active you will be unable to re-link if you make changes without returning and quitting properly.• Demonstrate the running application to your T.A. before leaving the lab.• If you want to save the junk you have left on the worksheet, do so on some file on your own disk. Now delete it from the copy in memory before selecting "Quit" from the file menu.• Ordinarily, you will not shut the computer down when you are finished with it; just leave it running for the next person•	Take a rest for a day or two, but come back again this week and do Part II to continue your orientation. You need to get going on your first assignment as it will be due next week.Part II Macintosh MPW menu Reference	The Macintosh tries to allow users the most control possible by presenting them with menus from which to choose commands. Menu options that cannot be chosen at the moment appear in gray, i.e. they are “dimmed.” Here are brief descriptions of each of the menu options that can be chosen from within MPW. For more complete information, read what's in the big reference binder. Spend some time experimenting with these commands until you are familiar with what most of them do.Apple MenuAbout MPW…	Puts up a dialog box indicating what version of MPW you are using.{List of Desk Accessories}	Feel free to experiment with the various desk accessories. (Please don't disturb the Control Panel settings.) The only DA you will likely need to use is the Chooser, which lets you select what printer you are connected to. For students taking this course, printing on the lab printers is free (included in lab fee.)File MenuNew…	Use this to start a new file. You will be asked to name it and to specify where on your disk it should go (if you have folders.)Open…	Use this to open a file that already exists on your disk.Open Selection	This is a shortcut to open a file. If the name of the file you want to open (in the default directory) appears in a window, select the name and this menu option will change so that you can open that file instantly.Close	This is equivalent to clicking in the close box of the active window. If you have made changes since the file was last saved, you will be asked if you want to save them. The Worksheet window cannot be closed — it is automatically saved when you quit MPW.Save	This command saves the active window, replacing the file on disk with what's in memory. Remember to save all your files often, as power disruptions have been known to occur without warning… DO NOT SAVE TO THE INTERNAL HARD DRIVE. If you do, the files will be deleted.Save As…	This command allows you to save the active window on disk under a new name, so that the previous copy is not erased. The window's name is changed to the new name.Save A Copy…	This is similar to Save As…, except that the window's name isn't changed, so that you can continue to edit the original document.Revert to Saved	If you make changes to a file that you decide aren't a good idea, you can discard them and go back to the last saved version.Page Setup…	Before printing you should select this option. Since print quality doesn't really matter in this course, you should select “Draft” quality for fastest results.Print Selection or Print Window	If nothing is selected, this will print out the active window. Or, you can select only a portion of the window for printing.Quit	No matter how much you love working in the computer lab, you'll have to select this option sometime. It closes up MPW returns you to the Finder, where you can easily see what's on what disks. Please leave the machine running when you are completely done. When you do quit, please leave the worksheet in the condition you found it.Delete	This is for deleting files from your disk. Please do not delete files from the hard drive.List Current Directory	This choice prints a list of the current default directory on the currently selected window. (Works best if it is the worksheet.) Select Undo to erase the list from the window.Edit MenuUndo	Many mistakes can be corrected by selecting this option. Selecting “Undo” again will “Redo” what was undone.Cut	Deletes the current selection (whatever is highlighted) and places it on the clipboard, so that it can be pasted in somewhere else.Copy	Copies the current selection onto the clipboard (a specially set aside section of memory) for later pasting.Paste	Replaces the current selection with the contents of the clipboard. (If nothing is selected, the contents of the clipboard are inserted at the current position of the blinking insertion point.) The clipboard is not modified, so that repeated “Pasting” will result in multiple copies.Clear	Deletes the current selection.Select All	Selects the entire contents of the active window.Show Clipboard	Brings up another window containing the contents of the clipboard. This window cannot be edited. This option changes to “Hide Clipboard” when appropriate.Format…	Brings up a dialog box where you can select the window's formatting. For example, you can select a larger font size if you find the default is too small. Monaco and Courier are the recommended fonts, as they make it easier to line things up.Align	This command rearranges the lines currently selected so that they are all indented the same amount as the first selected line. Shift Left & Shift Right	The currently selected range of lines will have their indentation changed by one tab width. If nothing is selected, the line with the insertion point will be moved. Useful if you decide to add a level of indentation.Find MenuFind…	Allows you to quickly find a word anywhere after the insertion point in the active window. Most options are self explanatory, but the “Selection Expression” option is really only for advanced users. If the word you are looking for cannot be found, the Mac will beep. Find Same	Finds the next occurrence of the word you most recently tried to find.Find Selection	Finds the next occurrence of the current selection. Thus, if the word you want to find is already on the screen, just select it and use this option to find the next occurrence of the word (or phrase) in your file. Display Selection	If you have scrolled away from the location of the current selection, this command will move it back into view.Replace…	Finds the next occurrence of a word you specify, and replaces it with another word you specify. You may choose to replace all subsequent occurrences of the original word.Replace Same	Repeats your previous selection of “Replace.”Top and Bottom	Selects the beginning and the end of the window respectively.Mark MenuMark	Places a mark at the current location or selection. You will be asked for a name for the mark, which is entered in the list.UnMark	Puts up a menu of the marked items for you to remove a mark.{list of marks}	Choosing one of these will jump the insertion point to the chosen mark.Window MenuTile Windows	Arranges the window on the desktop so that no windows are overlapping.Stack Windows	Arranges the window on the desktop so that the windows are as large as possible while still allowing some of each window to be seen.{List of Windows}	Selecting a window brings that window to the top. The active window has a checkmark, and the target window has a bullet. (If you don't know what the target window is, don't worry.) Any windows that have unsaved changes have their names underlined.Project Menu	This one is intended for team projects to keep track of the members' work. You will not be using it.Directory Menu	Commands that involve the saving and reading of files act on the disk directory that is currently set as the "default." You should at the time that MPW ran, then the name of your disk will be the default directory. Show Directory...	This choice will display an information box with the name of the currently set default directory shown.Set Directory...	This allows you to change to a different default directory. Use this when the number of files on your disk has grown to the point where you need to organize them in folders, one of which you want to make the default directory for operations for a particular session.{directory list} below the dotted line...	This is a list of directories that have at one time or another been the default directory. To change the setting to any one of these, simply select its name from the list and the default will be set to that name.The M2 Menu	See the first part of the lab for a description of the first three items. The next three are similar to the first three, except that they work on files instead of on the active window. In order for the compiler to work correctly, the file must be of the form filename.MOD. In order for the link to work correctly, it must be given a file called filename.make. These files are chosen from the standard file dialogue box that appears when you select one of these menu items. In the rare event that you want your program also to run on an older (68K) machine, you need to change the FatMode to either 68K or to Fat. Otherwise, or if  you don't know what a Fat Mode is, don't touch this.Part 2 Printing Hard Copies	In order to get a copy of your program text, you need only have it in the active window and select "Print" from the File menu. If the dialog box that comes up lists one of the Lab printers (Calvin or Hobbes) you can press the "return" key, and everything will be taken care of. If some other printer is selected, cancel the print and select the chooser from the apple menu. Select the LaserWriter option and select a LaserWriter from the list. Close this box, returning to MPW and try printing again.	There are some simple ways that you can use to get a copy of the output from your program onto a piece of paper.	(a) The simplest is to pull down the File Print command while your program is active. Alternately, you may wish to save a copy of the window in a file and print it some other time, say from a word processor. You may also select the entire document, Copy to the clipboard, switch to another program (such as the MPW Shell), and Paste it there, then print.	(b) A second, which you may find useful in conjunction with the first is to redirect the output as the program is running. You do this by including the lineFROM RedirStdIO IMPORT  OpenInput, CloseInput, OpenOutput, CloseOutput; in the import section; the lineOpenOutput;in your program before the first line of the part that you want to be sending to the file.and, the lineCloseOutput;in your program after the last part of the program where you want output to go to the file.	When the program runs, and encounters the OpenOutput command, a standard output dialog box will be printed on the screen. Type a file name, or use the default already in the box Output and that is where all Writexx statements will send their output until the CloseOutput statement is encountered. If you choose the cancel box without giving a file name, the output will go to the screen as usual.	Note that if the CloseOutput is not included in your program, this will not work, and you may not even be able to delete the flawed file from your disk until the next time you restart the computer.	Note also that all output is sent to the file during this time, so no prompts printed by WriteString will appear on the screen. We will improve on this limitation later. Note also that this is not standard Modula-2; it has been provided courtesy of TWU. You can now open the file you have created, and print it just as you did your listings above.	Other methods will be discussed at a later date. These are the simple ones; more powerful and versatile ones take more work.	This lab has been all information and no instructions to do anything. Well, don't just sit there -- experiment. You can't really do any harm ... I think.NOTE: You may wish to edit your files with a word processor rather than with MPW. This is fine, as long as you call the originals "filename.MOD". From here, you can use MPW on the files as stored on the disk, or you can copy from the word processing version to an MPW window for compiling. In either event, you are likely to want to use the word processor for your documentation (though you may keep this in an MPW file as well) because of the opportunity for using bold, italics, and various type faces. If so, we recommend NISUS or WORD—both of which are available from all the Macintoshes. You may also do documentation and editing on a Wintel machine as the Mac can read those files too, provided your disk is DOS/Win formatted.NOTE: Be sure that you are able to run Netscape and find the online copy of the text, and that you can locate the files athttp://faith.csc.twu.ca/~rsutc/in the CMPT14x directory. Practice by copying some material from the textbook and putting it into a file on your own disk and by transferring the files in the CMPT14x folder to your disk as well.